Quote from the book "The Tomorrow Makers - A Brave New World of
Living-Brain Machines", by Grant Fjermedal.  Macmillan, 1986.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

    I mentioned the XOR hack that Gumby had liked.

    "Two XORs in a row?" Sussman said.  "Sounds like a Gosper program.
I can tell you who it was.  Bill Gosper.  That's the kind of thing
Gosper would write.  It's very brilliant, very clever, and it's also
at a very low level of detail.  And then there are people who are more
architectural.

    "When I see a program written by Gosper, I can recognize it.  I
can read programs written by Winston [Patrick Henry Winston, a former
Minsky student who now heads the department] and tell you that's a
Winston program.  It's got its own flavor.

    Then Sussman opened the file drawer, saying, "A long, long time
ago, what did LISP look like?"  He laughed, pulled out a half-inch
thick computer printout, laughed again, and said, "It was only this
big.  That's the amazing thing.  It was written by many people.  A
listing of LISP systems now is about five or six times as think.

    "Yet I can look through this and read various pieces of the code and
say, 'This part was written by [Richard] Greenblatt.'  I can tell."

    The[n] he pulled out a printout that he handled as if it were an
original Gutenberg bible.  It was the original code for the ITS
operating system—the Incompatible Timesharing system.  It even seemed
awesome to me.  Today we just accept the fact that a mainframe
computer can be in the basement of a building and desktop terminals
can be spread throughout a building, or throughout the world,
providing anyone with a terminal, access to the computer.  It is hard
to realize that as late as the 1960s this wasn't the case.  If you
wanted computer time, you wrote your program, took it to the computer
room, and had it run oftentimes by someone else, even if you wanted to
do it yourself.

    It is a tribute to the modesty and especially to the irreverence
of the early hackers that when they created the world's first
timesharing system at MIT, they provided it with a name that was
completely opposite from what it really was: the Incompatible
Timesharing System.

    There was Gerry Sussman holding that half-inch printout, a blessed
relic from 1967.  The machine has a Moby memory, and as if reciting
from the opening words of the Great American novel, Sussman held the
printout in his hands and said, "The first line of it is, Moby is
One." It was written as Moby = 1, but the way Sussman read it, there
was the sound of poetry and philosophy, as existential a piece of
haiku as I have ever heard: Moby is One.  "These days such an
operating system would have maybe one hundred times as much code.  But
this is what it was like then, filled with some very beautiful code —
and some very ugly code.  Some of it is humorous, and some of it is
sad.  Some of it had ideas in it that have been lost.  Some historian
could go through it someday and read it the way people read the Dead
Sea Scrolls and say, 'Aha, The guys who wrote this were real smart
guys.  And some of the things they knew, we don't even know now.'"
